.. sectnum::

.. _Introduction:

Introduction
============

This document describes the Intermediate Service Model format of the
`Language Ecosystem for Modeling Microservice Archictecture`_. The project aims
to facilitate the development of *microservice-based software systems* 
:cite:`Newman2015` by employing Model-driven Development (MDD) 
:cite:`Combemale2017`.

In this context, a microservice architecture consists of several different types
of models, listed in :numref:`tab__model_types`.

.. _tab__model_types:

.. table:: Model types

    =================   ========================================================
    **Model Type**      **Description**
    -----------------   --------------------------------------------------------
    Domain Data Model   A Domain Data Model describes the domain-specific data 
                        used by a modeled microservice to specify its 
                        input/output data. See also the 
                        :doc:`Intermediate Data Model Format Specification 
                        <data_model:index>`.
    Mapping Model       A Mapping Model allows for assigning (alternative) 
                        technologies to, e.g., modeled microservices in a
                        Service Model and complex types in a Data Model.
    Service Model       A Service Model contains several microservice models, 
                        their interfaces, and operations. The contents of 
                        imported Domain Data Models, e.g., data structures, may 
                        be used to type operations' parameters.
    Operation Model     An Operation Model expresses the deployment of 
                        microservices being imported from Service Models.
    Technology Model    A Technology models encapsulates descriptions of 
                        technologies. For instance, certain implementation 
                        technologies, e.g., Java or Go, and protocol 
                        technologies, e.g., REST or AMQP, may be contained in a
                        Technology Model. Moreover, service or operation 
                        *aspects* :cite:`Kiczales1997` may be defined, which 
                        enable to reify technology specifications in Mapping, 
                        Operation, or Service Models.
    =================   ========================================================

.. _ModelProcessing:

Model Processing
================
The creation of the models happens within a bundle of Eclipse [#eclipse]_ 
plugins that are based on Xcore [#xcore]_ and Xtext [#xtext]_. These 
technologies build upon the Ecore metamodeling standard :cite:`Steinberg2011`
and the Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF) [#emf]_.

However, to detach the processing of the models from the Eclipse ecosystem and 
allow microservice teams for creating custom model processors like validators 
and *code generators* :cite:`Combemale2017` that do not need to depend on EMF, 
the models are exported [#model-export]_ from Eclipse to the technology-agnostic
XML Metadata Interchange (XMI) format [#xmi]_.

XMI is based on XML and encodes a model instance, whose *metamodel*
:cite:`Combemale2017` is based on the Meta Object Facility (MOF) [#mof]_ which
is generally the case for Ecore metamodels and derived model instances.

Format Specification
====================
This document describes the metamodel and thus the structure of XMI files of
Intermediate Service Models, i.e., instances of Domain Data Models that were 
exported from Eclipse (cf. :ref:`Introduction` and :ref:`ModelProcessing`). It 
may be used as reference, when implementing custom model processors for 
microservice-related Service Models.

:numref:`fig_metamodel` shows the structure of the metamodel of the Intermediate
Service Models in an object-oriented way in the form of a UML class diagram. The
modeling concepts, their properties, and relationships are depicted as classes, 
attributes, and associations, respectively.

.. _fig_metamodel:

.. figure:: figures/metamodel.png
    :target: _images/metamodel.png

    Metamodel of Intermediate Service Models

In the following, the document contains a reference of each modeling concept of 
the metamodel depicted in :numref:`fig_metamodel`.

.. HINT::

    Attributes that may contain more than one value but exhibit a ``*`` 
    multiplicity, i.e., they may contain an arbitrary number of values or even
    none at all (``*`` is shorthand UML notation for ``0..*``), are never null.

    In case no multiplicity is stated after the object type of an attribute, the
    attribute may be null. For example, an attribute defined as ``String name``
    implicitly has a multiplicity ``0..1`` and in the zero-case the String may
    be null.

    However, in case the attribute's type is a built-in primitive Java type, 
    e.g. ``int``, the attribute will never be null but exhibits the type's 
    default value in case it did not receive an explicit value.

Model Root
----------

.. java:type:: class IntermediateServiceModel
    
    Root of the Intermediate Service Model instance.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] sourceModelUri

        `\"file\"` URI pointing to the source Service Model file from which 
        this model was derived. Not that this might be an empty string, if the
        :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` instances were derived from 
        different Service Models. Model processors should then rely on the
        :ref:`eponymous attribute 
        <link__IntermediateMicroservice_sourceModelUri>` in the 
        ``IntermediateMicroservice`` concept.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImport[*] imports

        References to :java:type:`data_model:IntermediateDataModel`, Technology
        Model (cf. :numref:`tab__model_types`), or Intermediate Service Model
        instances that were imported into the source Service Model
        (cf. :java:type:`data_model:IntermediateImport`).

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice[1..*] microservices

        Modeled :java:type:`microservices <IntermediateMicroservice>` in the
        source Service Model.

Microservices
-------------

.. java:type:: class IntermediateMicroservice

    A modeled microservice.    
    
    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_sourceModelUri:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] sourceModelUri

        `\"file\"` URI pointing to the source Service Model file from which 
        this microservice originates.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_name:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        Unique name of the service.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_version:

    .. py:attribute:: String version

        Optional version of the service.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        Qualified name of the service. This is the service's name prefixed by
        its version, if any. Both name fragments are separated by dots.

    .. py:attribute:: MicroserviceType[1] type

        :cpp:enum:`Type <MicroserviceType>` of the microservice.

    .. py:attribute:: Visibility[1] visibility

        :cpp:enum:`Visibility` of the microservice.

    .. py:attribute:: boolean effectivelyImplemented

        Flag to indicate if the microservice has at least one 
        :java:type:`IntermediateOperation` that is not marked as being not
        not implemented (either directly or transitively via its encapsulating
        :java:type:`IntermediateInterface`.

        .. HINT::

            Code generators should consider to also generate code for not (yet)
            implemented microservices and, e.g., return failures to callers.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_technologies:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateTechnology[*] technologies

        :java:type:`Technologies <IntermediateTechnology>` assigned to the 
        microservice. 

        .. NOTE::

            In case, no technologies are specified for a microservice, code 
            generators are free to generate code for the microservice or not.

        .. HINT::

            There can only be one technology that defines default primitive 
            types. Moreover, it is guaranteed that default protocol/data format 
            combinations are unambiguous. For instance, there can only be one 
            default synchronous protocol across all referenced technologies.
        
    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_endpoints:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateEndpoint[*] endpoints

        :java:type:`Endpoints <IntermediateEndpoint>` assigned to the 
        microservice.

        .. HINT::

            If no endpoints were specified for the microservice's (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateMicroservice_protocols>`, the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute of
            the :java:type:`IntermediateEndpoint` class will be empty.
            
            If no endpoints were specified or could be determined from (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateMicroservice_protocols>`, or in case the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute
            is empty, code generators should produce sensible defaults, e.g., 
            from the microservice's name.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_protocols:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateProtocolSpecification[0..2] protocols

        :java:type:`Protocol specifications <IntermediateProtocolSpecification>`
        assigned to the microservice. There might be exactly one protocol
        specification per :cpp:enum:`communication type <CommunicationType>`. 

        .. NOTE::

            In case the microservice had no protocols assigned in the source
            Service Model, the default protocols of the missing
            :cpp:enum:`communication types <CommunicationType>` are taken from
            the assigned 
            :ref:`technologies <link__IntermediateMicroservice_technologies>`.
            That is, the attribute is only empty if the microservice had no
            protocol-defining technology assigned.

        .. HINT::

            If no protocol specifications are assigned to the service, code 
            generators should produce sensible defaults, e.g., from the 
            microservice's name.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredMicroservices:

    .. py:attribute:: MicroserviceReference[*] requiredMicroservices

        :java:type:`References <MicroserviceReference>` to required 
        microservices.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredInterfaces:

    .. py:attribute:: InterfaceReference[*] requiredInterfaces

        :java:type:`References <InterfaceReference>` to required interfaces.

    .. _link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredOperations:    

    .. py:attribute:: OperationReference[*] requiredOperations

        :java:type:`References <OperationReference>` to required operations.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[*] aspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` of the microservice.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateServiceModel serviceModel

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateServiceModel` instance.

.. cpp:enum:: MicroserviceType

    Possible types of an :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice`.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: FUNCTIONAL

        A functional microservice realizes the business functions of the
        microservice-based software system.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: INFRASTRUCTURE

        Infrastructure microservices provide the architecture with capabilities
        that are not related to business but technical functions. Examples of
        such functions comprise database lookups or integration of legacy
        systems.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: UTILITY

        Teams may realize utility microservices to implement reusable, 
        business-related helper functions, e.g., for currency conversion.
        
.. cpp:enum:: Visibility

    Possible visibilitiy qualifiers of an 
    :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice`, :java:type:`IntermediateInterface`,
    and :java:type:`IntermediateOperation`.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: INTERNAL

        Internal services/interfaces/operations must only be visible to the 
        services of the same team.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: IN_MODEL

        Qualifies an interface/operation to be visible only within the current
        service model file and its services.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: ARCHITECTURE

        Architecture services/interfaces/operations must only be visible to the 
        services of the same architecture, but not to external consumers.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: PUBLIC

        Public services/interfaces/operations must be visible to all services of
        the same architecture and also to external consumers.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateInterface

    This class represents an interface of an 
    :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice`.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_name:
    
    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        Name of the interface.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_version:

    .. py:attribute:: String version

        Optional version of the interface.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        Qualified name of the interface. This is the interface's name prefixed 
        by its version and its microservice's 
        :ref:`qualified name <link__IntermediateMicroservice_qualifiedName>`.
        All name fragments are separated by dots.

    .. py:attribute:: Visibility[1] visibility

        :cpp:enum:`Visibility` of the interface.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_notImplemented:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean notImplemented

        Flag to indicate if the interface was marked as being not implemented.

        .. HINT::

            Code generators should consider to also generate code for not (yet)
            implemented interfaces and, e.g., return failures to callers.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_hasImplementedOperations:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean hasImplementedOperations

        Flag to indicate if the interface has at least one 
        :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>` whose 
        :ref:`notImplemented <link__IntermediateOperation_notImplemented>`
        attribute is ``false``.

        .. HINT::

            Code generators should consider to also generate code for interfaces
            whose operations are not (yet) implemented and, e.g., return 
            failures to callers.

        .. NOTE::

            The 
            :ref:`notImplemented <link__IntermediateInterface_notImplemented>`
            and :ref:`hasImplementedOperations
            <link__IntermediateInterface_hasImplementedOperations>` are 
            independent of each other. The first is set by the modeler, while
            the second is derived from the corresponding flags of the 
            interface's :java:type:`operations <IntermediateOperation>`.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_endpoints:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateEndpoint[*] endpoints

        :java:type:`Endpoints <IntermediateEndpoint>` assigned to the interface.

        .. HINT::

            If no endpoints were specified for the interface's (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateInterface_protocols>`, the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute of
            the :java:type:`IntermediateEndpoint` class will be empty.
            
            If no endpoints were specified or could be determined from (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateInterface_protocols>`, or in case the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute
            is empty, code generators should produce sensible defaults, e.g., 
            from the interface's name.

    .. _link__IntermediateInterface_protocols:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateProtocolSpecification[0..2] protocols

        :java:type:`Protocol specifications <IntermediateProtocolSpecification>`
        assigned to the interface. There might be exactly one protocol
        specification per :cpp:enum:`communication type <CommunicationType>`.

        .. HINT::

            If no protocol specifications were explicitly assigned to the 
            interface, it \"inherits\" the specifications of its 
            :ref:`microservice <link__IntermediateMicroservice_protocols>`.

            If the service also exhibited no protocol specifications and thus 
            the interface does neither, code generators should produce sensible
            defaults, e.g., from the interface's name.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation[*] operations

        :java:type:`Operations <IntermediateOperation>` of the interface.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateReferredOperation[*] referredOperations

        :java:type:`Referred Operations <IntermediateReferredOperation>` of the
        interface.

        .. NOTE::

            An interface defines at least one operation or refers to an existing
            operation, i.e., at least one of the ``operations`` and 
            ``referredOperations`` is not empty.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[*] aspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` of the interface.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice microservice

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` instance.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateOperation

    This class represents an operation of an :java:type:`IntermediateInterface`.

    .. _link__IntermediateOperation_name:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        Name of the operation.

    .. _link__IntermediateOperation_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        Qualified name of the operation. This is the operation's name prefixed 
        by its interface's 
        :ref:`qualified name <link__IntermediateInterface_qualifiedName>`.
        Both name fragments are separated by dots.

    .. py:attribute:: Visibility[1] visibility

        :cpp:enum:`Visibility` of the operation.

    .. _link__IntermediateOperation_notImplemented:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean notImplemented

        Flag to indicate if the operation was marked as being not implemented.

        .. HINT::

            Code generators should consider to also generate code for not (yet)
            implemented operation and, e.g., return failures to callers.

    .. _link__IntermediateOperation_endpoints:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateEndpoint[*] endpoints

        :java:type:`Endpoints <IntermediateEndpoint>` assigned to the operation.

        .. HINT::

            If no endpoints were specified for the operation's (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateOperation_protocols>`, the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute of
            the :java:type:`IntermediateEndpoint` class will be empty.
            
            If no endpoints were specified or could be determined from (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateOperation_protocols>`, or in case the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute
            is empty, code generators should produce sensible defaults, e.g., 
            from the operation's name.

    .. _link__IntermediateOperation_protocols:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateProtocolSpecification[0..2] protocols

        :java:type:`Protocol specifications <IntermediateProtocolSpecification>`
        assigned to the operation. There might be exactly one protocol
        specification per :cpp:enum:`communication type <CommunicationType>`.

        .. HINT::

            If no protocol specifications were explicitly assigned to the 
            operation, it \"inherits\" the specifications of its 
            :ref:`interface <link__IntermediateInterface_protocols>`.

            If the interface also exhibited no protocol specifications and thus 
            the operation does neither, code generators should produce sensible
            defaults, e.g., from the operation's name.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateParameter[*] parameters

        :java:type:`Parameters <IntermediateParameter>` of the operation.

        .. NOTE::

            There might be more than one 
            :cpp:enum:`outgoing parameter <ExchangePattern>` and it is up to
            code generators on how to proceed with this. For example, all 
            outgoing parameters could be condensed within a uniforming data
            structure.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateApiOperationComment[0..1] apiOperationComment

        :java:type:`API comment <IntermediateApiOperationComment>` of the 
        operation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[*] aspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` of the operation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateInterface interface

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateInterface` instance.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateApiOperationComment

    An API-related comment of an :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.
    It  describes the purpose of the operation, possibly together with its 
    parameters in :java:type:`IntermediateApiParameterComment` instances.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] comment

        Comment, which describes the operation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateApiParameterComment[*] parameterComments

        API comments for the operation's parameters.

        .. HINT::

            It is possible that a parameter is commented more than once. Code 
            generators are free in their reaction to such a situation. For 
            instance, all comments may be dropped except for the last one or
            they may ask users on how to proceed in such a situation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation operation

        The :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>` being documented by
        this comment.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateApiParameterComment

    An API-related comment for a :java:type:`parameter <IntermediateParameter>`
    of an :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.

        .. py:attribute:: String[1] comment

            Comment, which describes the parameter.

        .. py:attribute:: boolean required

            Flag to indicate if this parameter is required (from an API point of
            view). 

            .. NOTE::            

                It is possible to document even :ref:`optional parameters
                <link__IntermediateParameter_optional>` as being required.

        .. py:attribute:: IntermediateParameter parameter

            The :java:type:`parameter <IntermediateParameter>` being documented 
            by this comment.

        .. py:attribute:: IntermediateApiOperationComment operationComment

            The :java:type:`API operation comment 
            <IntermediateApiOperationComment>` to which this parameter comment
            belongs.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateParameter

    A parameter of an :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        Name of the parameter.

    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        Qualified name of the parameter. This is the parameter's name prefixed 
        by its operation's 
        :ref:`qualified name <link__IntermediateOperation_qualifiedName>`.
        Both name fragments are separated by dots.

    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_exchangePattern:

    .. py:attribute:: ExchangePattern[1] exchangePattern

        :cpp:enum:`ExchangePattern` of the parameter.

    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_communicationType:

    .. py:attribute:: CommunicationType[1] communicationType

        :cpp:enum:`CommunicationType` of the parameter.

    .. py:attribute:: boolean communicatesFault

        Flag to indicate that the parameter is used to communicate fault values
        to the caller.

        .. NOTE::

            It is up to the code generator to ensure that the caller is aware 
            that the parameter communicates a fault.

    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_optional:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean optional

        Flag to indicate that the parameter is optional.

        .. NOTE::

            The combination of the :ref:`exchangePattern 
            <link__IntermediateParameter_exchangePattern>`, 
            :ref:`communicationType 
            <link__IntermediateParameter_communicationType>`, and ``optional``
            attributes determine a parameter's \"timing behavior\":

            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |**Exchange**|**Communication**|**Opt?** |**Operation Behavior**   |
            |**Pattern** |**Type**         |         |                         |
            +============+=================+=========+=========================+
            |``IN``      |``ASYNCHRONOUS`` |``false``|Operation may retrieve   |
            |            |                 |         |value at an arbitrary    |
            |            |                 |         |point in time during its |
            |            |                 |         |execution.               |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``IN``      |``ASYNCHRONOUS`` |``true`` |Operation must retrieve  |
            |            |                 |         |value at some point in   |
            |            |                 |         |time during its          |
            |            |                 |         |execution.               |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``IN``      |``SYNCHRONOUS``  |``false``|Operation can only be    |
            |            |                 |         |executed if parameter has|
            |            |                 |         |has a value.             |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``IN``      |``SYNCHRONOUS``  |``true`` |Operation can be executed|
            |            |                 |         |without the parameter    |
            |            |                 |         |value and it cannot      |
            |            |                 |         |expect to ever retrieve  |
            |            |                 |         |a value for the          |
            |            |                 |         |parameter.               |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``OUT``     |``ASYNCHRONOUS`` |``false``|Operation may emit value |
            |            |                 |         |at an arbitrary point in |
            |            |                 |         |time during its          |
            |            |                 |         |execution.               |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``OUT``     |``ASYNCHRONOUS`` |``true`` |Operation emits value at |
            |            |                 |         |some point in time during|
            |            |                 |         |its execution.           |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``OUT``     |``SYNCHRONOUS``  |``false``|Operation emits value    |
            |            |                 |         |when it finished its     |
            |            |                 |         |execution.               |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``OUT``     |``SYNCHRONOUS``  |``true`` |Operation might emit     |
            |            |                 |         |value after it finished  |
            |            |                 |         |its execution.           |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
            |``INOUT``   |all              |all      |Parameter behaves        |
            |            |                 |         |like an incoming and     |
            |            |                 |         |outgoing parameter for   |
            |            |                 |         |the respective           |
            |            |                 |         |communication type and   |
            |            |                 |         |\"optional\" flag.       |
            +------------+-----------------+---------+-------------------------+
    
    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_type:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateType type

        :ref:`Type <data_model:link__IntermediateType>` of the parameter.

        .. NOTE::

            A parameter cannot be typed with the built-in primitive type
            ``unspecified``.

    .. _link__IntermediateParameter_initializedByOperation:

    .. py:attribute:: OperationReference initializedByOperation

        Link to the :java:type:`IntermediateOperation` that initializes the
        parameter.

        .. NOTE::

            It is not safely guaranteed that the operation's return values and
            the parameter's type are compatible. This is due to the Service
            Modeling Language only yielding a warning if a (possible) type 
            incompatibility is detected. Moreover, the type check is based on 
            the :ref:`type system <data_model:link__built_in_type_system>` of 
            the Domain Data Modeling Language, which may not be applicable to 
            all target languages.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[*] aspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` of the parameter.

    .. py:attribute:: DataFieldAspects[*] fieldAspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` that were assigned to
        fields of the :ref:`structure type 
        <data_model:link__IntermediateDataStructure>` or :ref:`enumeration type 
        <data_model:link__IntermediateEnumeration>` of the parameter within a
        Mapping Model.

        .. HINT::

            These aspects are relevant only in the context of the parameter 
            within its defining operation. They are, however, not relevant in
            the context of the type of that defines the fields in its Data 
            Model. Aspects that were assigned to fields of the complex type 
            itself are directly assigned to the type in the corresponding
            :java:type:`IntermediateDataModel <IntermediateDataModel>`.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation operation

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateOperation` instance.

.. java:type:: class DataFieldAspects

    This concepts contains :java:type:`aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` 
    that were assigned to fields of a :java:type:`parameter's 
    <IntermediateParameter>` :ref:`structure type 
    <data_model:link__IntermediateDataStructure>` or :ref:`enumeration type 
    <data_model:link__IntermediateEnumeration>` within a Mapping Model.

    .. _link__DataFieldAspects_name:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        The name of the :ref:`structure type's
        <data_model:link__IntermediateDataStructure>` or :ref:`enumeration 
        type's <data_model:link__IntermediateEnumeration>` field to which the
        aspects in the context of the parameter were assigned.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        Qualified name of the field. It consists of the field's :ref:`name
        <link__DataFieldAspects_name>` prefixed by the parameter's 
        :ref:`qualified name <link__IntermediateParameter_qualifiedName>`.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[1..*] aspects

        The :java:type:`aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` that were assigned
        to the field in the context of the parameter.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateParameter parameter

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateParameter` instance.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateReferredOperation

    Referred operation of an :java:type:`IntermediateInterface`. In contrast to
    :java:type:`IntermediateOperations <IntermediateOperation>`, referred
    operations do not implement their own business logic. Instead, they act as
    façades to implemented 
    :java:type:`IntermediateOperations <IntermediateOperation>` within the same
    microservice. That is, requests/responses to the original operation/the
    caller are just forwarded by referred operations.

    Referred operations exhibit the same 
    :java:type:`parameters <IntermediateParameter>` as the original operations.
    However, they may have different 
    :java:type:`endpoints <IntermediateEndpoint>`,
    :java:type:`protocols <IntermediateProtocolSpecification>`, and
    :java:type:`aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>`.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] nameInReferringInterface

        The name of the referred operation within the referring interface.
        Currently, the name is identical to the name of the original operation.
        However, code generators should not rely on that and instead use the 
        content of this attribute to generate the referring operation.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedNameInReferringInterface

        The qualified name of the referred operation within the referring 
        interface. It consists of the name of the referring operation prefixed
        by the :ref:`qualified name 
        <link__IntermediateInterface_qualifiedName>` of its interface. Both name
        fragments are separated by dots.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation[1] operation

        Link to the original :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.

        .. NOTE::

            The type of the attribute is ``IntermediateOperation`` instead of
            :java:type:`OperationReference`, because the original operation must
            be in the same microservice as the referring operation and can thus
            not originate from an imported Service Model.
    
    .. _link__IntermediateReferredOperation_endpoints:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateEndpoint[*] endpoints

        :java:type:`Endpoints <IntermediateEndpoint>` assigned to the referred
        operation.

        .. HINT::

            If no endpoints were specified for the referred operation's 
            (default) :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateOperation_protocols>`, the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute of
            the :java:type:`IntermediateEndpoint` class will be empty.
            
            If no endpoints were specified or could be determined from (default)
            :ref:`protocol specifications 
            <link__IntermediateOperation_protocols>`, or in case the 
            :ref:`addresses <link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses>` attribute
            is empty, code generators should produce sensible defaults, e.g., 
            from the referred operation's name.

    .. _link__IntermediateReferredOperation_protocols:

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateProtocolSpecification[0..2] protocols

        :java:type:`Protocol specifications <IntermediateProtocolSpecification>`
        assigned to the referred operation. There might be exactly one protocol
        specification per :cpp:enum:`communication type <CommunicationType>`.

        .. HINT::

            If no protocol specifications were explicitly assigned to the 
            referred operation, it \"inherits\" the specifications of its 
            :ref:`interface <link__IntermediateInterface_protocols>`.

            If the interface also exhibited no protocol specifications and thus 
            the referred operation does neither, code generators should produce
            sensible defaults, e.g., from the referred operation's name.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImportedAspect[*] aspects

        :java:type:`Aspects <IntermediateImportedAspect>` of the referred 
        operation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateInterface referringInterface

        Link to the containing :java:type:`IntermediateInterface` instance.

Communication
-------------

This subsection describes concepts related to specifying the communication
between microservices.

.. cpp:enum:: CommunicationType

    The values of this enum represent certain communication types.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: ASYNCHRONOUS
       
        Asynchronous communication.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: SYNCHRONOUS
       
        Synchronous communication.

.. cpp:enum:: ExchangePattern

    The values of this enum represent certain exchange patterns.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: IN

        Incoming information exchange.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: OUT

        Outgoing information exchange.

    .. cpp:enumerator:: INOUT

        Incoming and outgoing information exchange.

.. java:type:: class IntermediateEndpoint

    A protocol- and format-specific endpoint, e.g., `\"http://www.example.org\"`
    for HTTP and a format like JSON.

    .. py:attribute:: CommunicationType[1] communicationType

        The :cpp:enum:`communication type <CommunicationType>` assigned to the 
        endpoint. It corresponds to the communication type of the endpoint's
        :ref:`protocol <link__IntermediateEndpoint_protocol>`.

    .. _link__IntermediateEndpoint_protocol:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] protocol

        Name of the endpoint's protocol.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] dataFormat

        Name of the endpoint's data format.

    .. _link__IntermediateEndpoint_addresses:

    .. py:attribute:: String[*] addresses

        List of protocol- and format-specific addresses that were assigned to 
        the endpoint, e.g., `\"http://www.example.org\"`.

        .. HINT::

            If the list of addresses is empty, code generators should produce 
            sensible defaults, as described 
            :ref:`here <link__IntermediateMicroservice_endpoints>`,
            :ref:`here <link__IntermediateInterface_endpoints>`,
            :ref:`here <link__IntermediateOperation_endpoints>`, and
            :ref:`here <link__IntermediateReferredOperation_endpoints>`.

        .. HINT::

            In case the modeler did not specify a data format for an endpoint,
            it depends on the technology models, which endpoints are created. If
            the technology model defines a default protocol and thus a default
            format, an endpoint for this protocol and format is created. If the
            protocol is not the default protocol for the communication type and
            hence does not define a default format, endpoints for all formats
            of the protocols are created. However, code generators must only 
            produce endpoints for the protocols and data formats that were 
            assigned to the respective 
            :ref:`microservice <link__IntermediateMicroservice_protocols>`,
            :ref:`interface <link__IntermediateInterface_protocols>`,
            :ref:`operation <link__IntermediateOperation_protocols>`, or
            :ref:`referred operation 
            <link__IntermediateReferredOperation_protocols>`.

        .. HINT::

            The addresses are not checked for validity by the Service Modeling
            Language. This step has to be done by model processors.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateTechnology[1] technology

        Link to the Technology Model (cf. :numref:`tab__model_types`) which 
        defines the protocol and data format.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice microservice

        :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` to which the endpoint was 
        assigned.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateInterface interface

        :java:type:`IntermediateInterface` to which the endpoint was assigned.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation operation

        :java:type:`IntermediateOperation` to which the endpoint was assigned.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateReferredOperation referredOperation

        :java:type:`IntermediateReferredOperation` to which the endpoint was 
        assigned.
        
.. java:type:: class IntermediateProtocolSpecification

    A protocol and data format specification.

    .. py:attribute:: CommunicationType[1] communicationType

        :cpp:enum:`CommunicationType` of the specification.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] protocol

        Name of the specification's protocol.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] dataFormat

        Name of the specification's data format.

References
----------

This subsection describes concepts that are used to model references to possibly
imported :java:type:`microservices <IntermediateMicroservice>`,
:java:type:`interfaces <IntermediateInterface>`, or
:java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.

.. java:type:: class MicroserviceReference

    Reference to a possibly imported 
    :java:type:`microservice <IntermediateMicroservice>`.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        :ref:`Name <link__IntermediateMicroservice_name>` of the referenced
        microservice.

    .. py:attribute:: String version

        :ref:`Version <link__IntermediateMicroservice_version>` of the 
        referenced microservice.

    .. _link__MicroserviceReference_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        :ref:`Qualified name <link__IntermediateMicroservice_qualifiedName>` of 
        the referenced microservice.

    .. _link__MicroserviceReference_imported:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean imported

        Flag to indicate if the referenced microservice was imported from 
        another Service Model.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImport import

        Link to the :java:type:`data_model:IntermediateImport` which points to
        the imported Service Model. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__MicroserviceReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute contains a value. Otherwise it is ``null``.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice localMicroservice

        Link to the referenced :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` in the same
        Service Model as the ``MicroserviceReference``. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__MicroserviceReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute is ``null``. Otherwise it contains a value.

        .. HINT::

            If the attribute is ``null``, i.e., the referenced microservice is
            defined in another Service Model, model processors need to retrieve
            details of the referenced service from the imported Service Model
            themselves. That is, they need to parse the imported model and find
            the referenced microservice leveraging the
            :ref:`qualified name <link__MicroserviceReference_qualifiedName>` of
            this ``MicroserviceReference`` instance.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice requiringMicroservice

        :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` that 
        :ref:`requires <link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredMicroservices>`
        this microservice.

.. java:type:: class InterfaceReference

    Reference to a possibly imported 
    :java:type:`interface <IntermediateInterface>`.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        :ref:`Name <link__IntermediateInterface_name>` of the referenced
        interface.

    .. py:attribute:: String version

        :ref:`Version <link__IntermediateInterface_version>` of the referenced
        interface.

    .. _link__InterfaceReference_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        :ref:`Qualified name <link__IntermediateInterface_qualifiedName>` of the
        referenced interface.

    .. _link__InterfaceReference_imported:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean imported

        Flag to indicate if the referenced interface was imported from another
        Service Model.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImport import

        Link to the :java:type:`data_model:IntermediateImport` which points to
        the imported Service Model. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__InterfaceReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute contains a value. Otherwise it is ``null``.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateInterface localInterface

        Link to the referenced :java:type:`IntermediateInterface` in the same
        Service Model as the ``InterfaceReference``. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__InterfaceReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute is ``null``. Otherwise it contains a value.

        .. HINT::

            If the attribute is ``null``, i.e., the referenced interface is
            defined in another Service Model, model processors need to retrieve
            details of the referenced interface from the imported Service Model
            themselves. That is, they need to parse the imported model and find
            the referenced interface leveraging the
            :ref:`qualified name <link__InterfaceReference_qualifiedName>` of
            this ``InterfaceReference`` instance.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice requiringMicroservice

        :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` that 
        :ref:`requires <link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredInterfaces>`
        this interface.

.. java:type:: class OperationReference

    Reference to a possibly imported 
    :java:type:`operation <IntermediateOperation>`.

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] name

        :ref:`Name <link__IntermediateOperation_name>` of the referenced
        operation.

    .. _link__OperationReference_qualifiedName:

    .. py:attribute:: String[1] qualifiedName

        :ref:`Qualified name <link__IntermediateOperation_qualifiedName>` of the
        referenced operation.

    .. _link__OperationReference_imported:

    .. py:attribute:: boolean imported

        Flag to indicate if the referenced operation was imported from another
        Service Model.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateImport import

        Link to the :java:type:`data_model:IntermediateImport` which points to
        the imported Service Model. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__OperationReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute contains a value. Otherwise it is ``null``.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateOperation localOperation

        Link to the referenced :java:type:`IntermediateOperation` in the same
        Service Model as the ``OperationReference``. If the 
        :ref:`imported <link__OperationReference_imported>` flag is ``true``
        this attribute is ``null``. Otherwise it contains a value.

        .. HINT::

            If the attribute is ``null``, i.e., the referenced operation is
            defined in another Service Model, model processors need to retrieve
            details of the referenced operation from the imported Service Model
            themselves. That is, they need to parse the imported model and find
            the referenced operation leveraging the
            :ref:`qualified name <link__OperationReference_qualifiedName>` of
            this ``OperationReference`` instance.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateMicroservice requiringMicroservice

        :java:type:`IntermediateMicroservice` that 
        :ref:`requires <link__IntermediateMicroservice_requiredInterfaces>`
        this operation.

    .. py:attribute:: IntermediateParameter initializedParameter

        :java:type:`IntermediateParameter` that is :ref:`initialized by 
        <link__IntermediateParameter_initializedByOperation>`
        this operation.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#eclipse] https://www.eclipse.org
.. [#xcore] https://wiki.eclipse.org/Xcore
.. [#xtext] https://www.eclipse.org/Xtext
.. [#emf] https://www.eclipse.org/modeling/emf
.. [#model-export] Actually, the models are *transformed* into the XMI format.
    Please refer to :cite:`Combemale2017` to learn more about *model* 
    *transformation*.
.. [#xmi] https://www.omg.org/spec/XMI
.. [#mof] https://www.omg.org/mof
.. [#java-type-conversions] 
    https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se11/html/jls-5.html#jls-5.1.2
.. [#golang] https://www.golang.org
.. [#python] https://www.python.org

Indices and Tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`search`

References
==========

.. bibliography:: references.bib

.. _Language Ecosystem for Modeling Microservice Archictecture:
  https://github.com/SeelabFhdo/lemma
